possible future work:

- add flags to determine how the structure is represented when loaded
- display multiple structures (osgcaveui pickboxes)
- collaboration between VR environments: synchronize data set loading
- syncronize animations (tight coupling)
- ability to display ball-and-stick structures; transition between visualization methods with opacity changes


Collaboration:   Manipulate Protein data sets in a mutli client/server enviroment
		 Implementation based on researcher feedback

Visualisation:
		transition between different Protein representations (ball and stick, helices and pipes)
		on view point/manual (google earth effect, going from an overview to a fine view)


!!!!!!!!!!Currently implementing
setting params for the cylinder based on number of structures that need to be loaded (creation adjusted dont need to know amount)
!!!! change CalcTrans to place structures around in a ring instead of in columns, then the user can specify
the number of rows in the cylinder (compelted)

loading restriction seems to low for blah (only 82 structures loaded)
Auto loading has issues when structures dont exist in cache and it fetches them from the pdb

Place a marker (cube) in the plane of the scene as a location for structures to be moved too (complete)
Adjust the structures using hue once in align mode (complete)
Reload structures after calling reset in align mode (didnt require reloading structures)


// currently working on
reloading structures (need to also copy contolling id and also unique number).... or when change color do it across boxes and delete structure
across the machines????

(super computing: does collabrative need to be working??)
Yes, adding this support


(!!!!!!!!!!!!!need to fix bug with messaging system!!!!!!!!!!) (fixed*)
(need to make remove single structure done via messaging) 
(Update: I think I have fixed bug but can't test until demo group have left)

(!!!!!!!! Need to come up with a better system for caching morphs, due to translation taking longer !!!!!!)
(!!!!!!!! Need to add texture of web info (JCSG) to plugin for temporary illustration of what is required !!!!!!!) 
(!!!!!!!! Need to add output in script file so can monitor progress !!!!!!!) 
(!!!!!!!! Need to cache pdb files as well (will need to them more for allignments and maybe reconversion) !!!!!!!)

// NOTE: Big demo the following week

// to do....
1) label the nodes with what structure e.g. setName(CART);  //complete
2) Adjust so when changing modes it looks for the correct structure  // complete
3) Disable morphing (that needs to be re-written due to multiple material nodes and overrides in the sub tree) //complete (disabled)
4) Add different mode changing in the pop up window (individual)  //complete
5) remove high and low mode from the menu  //complete
6) reorganise the menu  // complete
7) set the cache again // complete
8) by default only load the cartoon structures (the default load should be set in config file)  // complete
9) allow any combination of modes to be turned on  //complete


10) Fade hack: to display the surface in a single color (leave till monday if acceptable, fading only applicable to the surface)
11) get the browser working, also calculate what can be loaded and rendered on the galaxy
12) TODO LATER..... ALIGNMENT TOOL .... allowing matrixes to be calculated so proteins can be aligned


// clean files not being called from PDBPlugin 
