--- uTouch3D manual ---

Table:
1. open the door and turn on the switch on the multi-plug; this turns on the IR-lights
2. remove the camera's protection cap 
3. turn on the projector with the remote control (works through the projection plane)
4. the fans are connected to the tracking machine and start working when the machine is started


Multi-touch tracking machine:
1. Start Windows and login as "local" 
2. Start Community Core Vision (Desktop/CCV/CCV-1.3-win-bin/Community Core Vision.exe)
3. On the first start, the camera runs on 15fps only; in CCV click on the Camera Settings button in the toolbar, a window of the camera properties pops up; select the Format tab and adjust the camera to the maximum fps (60); close the camera properties window after confirming that change; CCV has to be closed and restarted in order to take the changes into effect;
4. after CCV has been restarted, check the Camera Framerate, it should be 25-27 fps on the VISARD machine
5. CCV can be calibrated by clicking the Enter Calibration button in the toolbar; in the calibration, the touch points are assigned to normalized coordinates
6. The calibration as well as the configuration settings of CCV can be found in the data folder (Desktop/CCV/CCV-1.3-win-bin/data): calibration.xml and config.xml: in the config.xml settings such as maximum blobs and ip-address of the target TUIO client can be adjusted


Rendering machine:
1. Start linux
2. If the projector shows no changes and just its start screen, restart the X server (Ctrl+Alt+Backspace); now the desktop should be extended to the projector
3. check if the projector is running in 120Hz mode: System->administration->NVidia X Server Settings; the projector runs in 60Hz mode sometimes and simply openning the NVidia X Server settings triggers it to run in the proper 120Hz mode; you can check this by clicking on the GPU 0 node in the NVidia X Server setting window and then on DFP-4 (Viewsonic PJD6381): Refresh Rate should be at 120Hz there
4. check the COVISE config file; the uTouch3D plugin has to be enabled; for VISTERIUM machine, covfig.vsiterium.xml is the proper config file
5. source covise and open a net (cluster-stars-disc-tracks-short.net)
6. start the net; OpenCOVER should receive the TUIO information from the tracking machine
7. the blobs are visualised by small white circles on the surface; if the circles are drawn, multi-touch interaction is working properly


